I am in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
How do I know this? It is in huge letters here on the dike.
And this dike is located on the Mississippi River, the most important river in America.
Not only because of the amount of water that flows through it, but because of the amount of freight.
Look at all these ships here ...
who are waiting to transport everything they have with them to the container ports ...
and to the factories that are miles along this river.
But there is a problem here, and something you may not know.
The Mississippi River does not want to be here anymore.
It's like this: about a hundred years ago, in the steamers' time ...
there was a bend in the river about 80 miles (129 km) from here, called Turnbull's Bend.
And thus you sail 20 miles (32 km) to ...
and of course, we are people, that is not possible.
So a channel was built that cut off that bend.
This, however, caused a problem.
Hydrological - hydra - hydrol - hyda - that is a hard word to say!
... hydrological - hydrological - hydro ...
... Water modeling was not really a science back then.
It was more a matter of just trying and looking at what works.
So this new channel ...
in combination with the removal of an accumulation of tree trunks on the Atchafalaya River ...
meant that the Mississippi wanted to move.
The river had found a much faster, steeper and quicker route to the sea ...
Under the influence of gravity ...
the Mississippi suddenly did not want to go this way anymore.
He wanted to descend through the bed of the Atchafalaya River ...
a very different route to the ocean ...
and that is a big problem, because we have all these plants here, all the container ports,
built on, and trusting on this river.
Moving the Mississippi would cost America billions, perhaps a trillion dollars.
That's why now, 80 miles upstream from here,
where Turnbull's Bend used to be,
the "Old River Control Structure".
This was built by the engineers of the US Army,
a truly fantastic group that is responsible for gigantic public works and dams in America.
The Old River Control Structure ensures that the Atchafalaya River is dammed,
stopped,
and that 70% of the water that comes in ...
still flows through the Mississippi.
It is a battlefield, you could say, between people ...
who try to make our world function ...
and nature, who very much likes to choose her own way.
So that was something you might not have known:
the Mississippi River really does not want to be here anymore.
NL translation by hrnbouma